Configuring security and governance and endorsing items in Microsoft Fabric is primarily a manual, UI-driven process within the Fabric portal, leveraging the Admin portal settings and workspace roles. This is because endorsement is a trust and visibility cue, not a security mechanism itself, and access control is managed via built-in roles and permissions.


// Configure Security and Governance
Security in Microsoft Fabric is managed at the workspace and item levels using a combination of workspace roles, item permissions, and Microsoft Purview sensitivity labels. 

1. Workspace Roles (UI-driven)

Workspace roles define the general level of access for users. 

// Steps:
 - Navigate to your desired workspace in the Fabric portal.
 - Select the ellipsis (...) next to the workspace name and choose Workspace settings.
 - Go to the Manage access tab.
 - Add users or security groups and assign them a role (Admin, Member, Contributor, Viewer). 

// 2. Item Permissions (UI-driven/T-SQL)
Permissions can be set on individual items for more granular control. 
- Steps (UI):
  1. In a workspace, locate the specific item (e.g., Lakehouse, Warehouse, KQL Database).
  2. Select the ellipsis (...) next to the item and choose Manage permissions or Security.
  3. Add users/groups and assign specific permissions (e.g., Read, Write, Read all data, etc.).

T-SQL Example (for Warehouse/SQL endpoint):
You can use standard T-SQL to manage security within the SQL database or Warehouse endpoint.


-- Grant SELECT permission on a specific table to a user
GRANT SELECT ON OBJECT::[dbo].[YourTableName] TO [user@yourorg.com];

-- Create a new database role and add a user to it
CREATE ROLE DataViewers;
ALTER ROLE DataViewers ADD MEMBER [user@yourorg.com];
GRANT SELECT ON SCHEMA::dbo TO DataViewers;


// 3. Sensitivity Labels (UI-driven)
Microsoft Purview is used to apply sensitivity labels for compliance. 
- Steps:
  1. Ensure sensitivity labels are defined in the Microsoft Purview compliance portal.
  2. In the Fabric portal, right-click an item and select Settings.
  3. In the General tab, find the Sensitivity label section.
  4. Select the appropriate label to classify the data. 


// Endorse Items
Endorsement indicates an item's quality and trustworthiness (Promoted, Certified, Master Data). This is configured in the Admin portal by a Fabric administrator and applied by authorized users in the item's settings. 
  1. Enable Endorsement in Admin Portal (Admin only, UI-driven) 
A Fabric admin must enable the feature and specify who can apply certain badges (e.g., Certified, Master Data). 
// Steps:
  1. Go to the Admin portal in Fabric.
  2. Navigate to Tenant settings.
  3. Under the Discovery settings section, enable the desired endorsement options (Certify content, Endorse master data (preview)).
  4. Specify whether the entire organization or specific security groups are authorized to apply the badge. 


// 2. Endorse an Item (UI-driven) 
Authorized users can then endorse items in the workspace. 
  Steps:
  1. Navigate to the workspace containing the item you want to endorse.
  2. Select the ellipsis (...) next to the item and choose Settings.
  3. Expand the Endorsement section.
  4. Select Promoted or, if authorized, toggle on Certified or Master data.
  5. Select Apply to save the change. 








